---
title: "Deployment"
date: 2020-02-19T21:25:11+01:00
weight: 10
pre: "<b>2. </b>"
---

Submariner provides a Go-based Kubernetes custom controller, called an [Operator](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-operator),
that provides easy API-based installation and management. A command line utility, *`subctl`*, wraps the Operator to aid users with manual
deployments and easy experimentation. `subctl` greatly simplifies the deployment of Submariner, and is therefore the recommended deployment
method. For complete information about `subctl`, please refer to [this page](subctl).

In addition to Operator and `subctl`, Submariner also provides [Helm Charts](helm).

## Installing `subctl`

{{< subctl-install >}}

## Deployment of the Broker

The Broker is a set of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) backed by the Kubernetes datastore. The Broker must be deployed on a cluster whose
Kubernetes API is accessible by all of the participating clusters.

```bash
subctl deploy-broker --kubeconfig <PATH-TO-KUBECONFIG-BROKER>
```

This will create:

* The `submariner-k8s-broker` namespace.
* The `Endpoint` and `Cluster` CRDs in the cluster.
* A Service Account (SA) in the namespace for subsequent `subctl` access.

It also generates the `broker-info.subm` file which contains the following elements:

* The API endpoint.
* A CA certificate for the API endpoint.
* The Service Account token for accessing the API endpoint.
* A random IPsec PSK which will be stored only in this file.
* Service Discovery settings.

{{% notice info %}}
The cluster in which the Broker is deployed can also participate in the dataplane connectivity with other clusters, but it will need to be
joined (see following step).
{{% /notice %}}

## Joining clusters

For each cluster you want to join, issue the following command:

```bash
subctl join --kubeconfig <PATH-TO-JOINING-CLUSTER> broker-info.subm --clusterid <ID>
```

`subctl` will automatically discover as much as it can, and prompt the user for any missing necessary information.
Note that each cluster must have a unique cluster ID; the cluster ID can be specified, or otherwise is going to be generated by default
based on the cluster name in the `kubeconfig` file.
